feat: add Actor Standby documentation (#1086)
apify/apify-docs: sources/platform/actors/running/actor_standby.md

No, the Standby runs are billed in the same fashion as the normal runs.
However, running Actors in Standby mode might have unexpected costs, as the Actors run in the background and consume resources even when no requests are being sent until they are terminated after the idle timeout period.

#### Are the Standby runs shared among users

No, even if you use the Actor-level hostname with the default configuration, the background Actor runs for your requests are not shared with other users.

#### How can I develop Actors using Standby mode

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

You can head to the Settings tab of your Actor, enable Standby mode, and set the default configuration.
![Standby for creators](./images/actor_standby/standby-creators.png)

Actors using Standby mode must run a HTTP server listening on a specific port. The user requests will then be proxied to the HTTP server.
You can get the port using the Actor configuration available in Apify SDK.

If you need to override the port, you can do it via `ACTOR_STANDBY_PORT` environment variable.
See example below with a simple Actor using Standby mode.

> <Tabs>

Reviewer: This way the chosen language will be synced with other tab groups across the documentation
```suggestion
<Tabs groupId="main">
```

<TabItem value="JavaScript" label="JavaScript">

```js
import http from 'http';
import { Actor } from 'apify';

await Actor.init();

const server = http.createServer(async (req, res) => {
    res.writeHead(200, { 'Content-Type': 'text/plain' });
    res.end('Hello from Actor Standby!\n');
});

server.listen(Actor.config.get('standbyPort'));
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Python" label="Python">

```python
from http.server import HTTPServer, SimpleHTTPRequestHandler
from apify import Actor, Configuration

class GetHandler(SimpleHTTPRequestHandler):
    def do_GET(self):
        self.send_response(200)
        self.end_headers()
        self.wfile.write(b'Hello from Actor Standby!')

async def main() -> None:
    async with Actor:

>         with HTTPServer(("", Actor.config.standby_port), GetHandler) as http_server:

Reviewer: Let's use single quotes for unification
```suggestion
        with HTTPServer(('', Actor.config.standby_port), GetHandler) as http_server:
```

---

> title: Actor standby

Reviewer: Are we using "Actor standby" or "Actor Standby"? I vote for Standby.
```suggestion
title: Actor Standby
```

description: Use the Actor as real-time API server.
sidebar_position: 7.3
slug: /actors/running/standby
sidebar_label: Actor standby
---

**Use the Actors in a lightweight mode as a blazingly fast API server.**

---

Traditional Actors are designed to run a single task and then stop. They are mostly intended to be used for batch jobs, when you e.g. need to do a big scrape or data processing task.

> However, in some applications, waiting for an Actor to start is not an option. Actor standby mode solves this problem by enabling you to have the Actor ready

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in some applications, waiting for an Actor to start is not an option. Actor Standby mode solves this problem by enabling you to have the Actor ready
```

in the background, waiting for the incoming HTTP requests. In a sense, Actor behaves like a real-time web server or standard API server.

#### How do I know if standby mode is enabled?
You will know that the Actor is enabled for the Standby if you see the **Standby** tab on the Actor's detail page.
In the tab, you will most importantly find the hostname of the server. You will find the description of the endpoints for this Actor,
what parameters they accept, and what they return in the Actor README.

To use the Actor in the Standby mode, you do not need to do anything, no clicking start button, etc. Simply use the provided hostname and endpoint in your application,
hit the API endpoint, and consume results.

![Standby tab](./images/actor_standby/standby-tab.png)

#### Can I still run the Actor in normal mode?
Yes, you can still modify the input, and click the Start button to run the Actor in the normal mode. However, node that the Standby Actor might
not support this mode, the run might fail, or return empty results. The normal mode is always supported in the Standby Beta, even for Actors that do not handle

> it well. Please, head to Actor README to learn more about the capabilities of your chosen Actor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it well. Please head to the Actor README to learn more about the capabilities of your chosen Actor.
```

#### Is there any scaling to accommodate the incoming requests?
When you use the Actor in the Standby mode, the system automatically scales the Actor to accommodate the incoming requests. Under the hood,

> the system starts new Actor runs, which you will see in the Actor runs tab, with origin set to Standby.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the system starts new Actor runs, which you will see in the Actor runs tab, with the origin set to Standby.
```

#### How do I customize standby configuration?
The Standby configuration currently consists of the following properties

> - **Max requests per run** - The maximum number of concurrent HTTP requests a single standby Actor run can accept. If this limit is exceeded, the system starts a new Actor run to handle the request, which will take a few seconds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Max requests per run** - The maximum number of concurrent HTTP requests a single standby Actor run can accept. If this limit is exceeded, the system starts a new Actor run to handle the request, which may take a few seconds.
```

> - **Desired requests per run** - A desired number of concurrent HTTP requests a single standby Actor run can handle. If this limit is exceeded, the system preemptively starts a new Actor run to handle additional requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Desired requests per run** - The number of concurrent HTTP requests a single Standby Actor run is configured to handle. If this limit is exceeded, the system preemptively starts a new Actor run to handle the additional requests.
```

> - **Memory (MB)** - The amount of memory (RAM) allocated for the Actor standby run, in megabytes. With more memory, the Actor can typically handle more requests in parallel, but the number of compute units consumed and the cost also grow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Memory (MB)** - The amount of memory (RAM) allocated for the Actor in Standby mode, in megabytes. With more memory, the Actor can typically handle more requests in parallel, but this also increases the number of compute units consumed and the associated cost.
```

> - **Idle timeout (seconds)** - If a standby Actor run doesn’t receive any HTTP requests in this amount of time, the system will finish the run. When a new request comes, the system might need to start a new standby Actor run to handle it, which will take a few seconds. Higher idle timeout increases the responsiveness but increases the costs as the Actor needs to keep running longer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Idle timeout (seconds)** - If a Standby Actor run doesn’t receive any HTTP requests within this time, the system will terminate the run. When a new request arrives, the system might need to start a new Standby Actor run to handle it, which can take a few seconds. A higher idle timeout improves responsiveness but increases costs, as the Actor remains active for a longer period.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: build is missing here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Build** - The Actor build that the runs of the Standby Actor will use. Can be either a build tag (e.g. `latest.`), or a build number (e.g. `0.1.2`).

```

You can see these in the Standby tab of the Actor detail page. However, note that these properties are not configurable at the Actor level. If you wish to
use the Actor-level hostname, this will always use the default configuration. In order to override this configuration, just create a new Task from the Actor.

> You can then head to the Standby tab of the created Task and modify the configuration as needed. Note that the task has specific hostname, so make

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can then head to the Standby tab of the created Task and modify the configuration as needed. Note that the task has a specific hostname, so make
```

sure to use that in your application if you wish to use the custom configuration.

#### Are the Standby runs billed differently?

> No, the standby runs are billed in the same fashion as the normal runs.

Reviewer: I would put a note here that the Standby Actors might incur unexpected costs because they're running in the background, waiting for requests.
```suggestion
No, the standby runs are billed in the same fashion as the normal runs.
However, there might be unexpected costs for running Actors in the Standby mode, as the Actors are running in the background and consuming resources even when no requests are being sent, until they are terminated after the idle timeout period.
```

Reviewer 2: * => Standby runs ?

#### Are the Standby runs shared among users?
No, even if you use the Actor-level hostname with the default configuration, the background Actor runs for your requests are not shared with other users.

#### How can I enable standby for my Actor?

> You can head to Settings tab of your Actor, enabled Standby mode and set the default configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can head to the Settings tab of your Actor, enable Standby mode, and set the default configuration.
```

> ![Standby for creators](./images/actor_standby/standby-creators.png)

Reviewer 3: This one seems to have "build", "memoryMbytes", "desiredRequestsPerActorRun" missing, I guess some old design?

Reviewer: Yeah, we'll have to update the screenshots once the UI is actually merged in the Console.

> Please make sure that you properly describe your Actors, its endpoints, and the schema for their

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please make sure to properly describe your Actors, their endpoints, and the schema for their
```

inputs and ouputs in your README.

#### Can I monetize my Actor in the Standby mode?

> No, the Standby mode is currently in Beta and the monetization is not supported.

Reviewer 2: [To consider]: I am thinking that some readme example would be nice, with [#actor-standby header](https://github.com/apify/apify-core/pull/16488#discussion_r1661270287)

---
title: Actor Standby
description: Use the Actor as a real-time API server.
sidebar_position: 7.3
slug: /actors/running/standby
sidebar_label: Actor standby
---

**Use the Actors in a lightweight mode as a blazingly fast API server.**

---

> Traditional Actors are designed to run a single task and then stop. They are mostly intended for batch jobs, such as when you need to perform a large scrape or data processing task.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Traditional Actors are designed to run a single task and then stop. They're mostly intended for batch jobs, such as when you need to perform a large scrape or data processing task.
```

However, in some applications, waiting for an Actor to start is not an option. Actor Standby mode solves this problem by enabling you to have the Actor ready
in the background, waiting for the incoming HTTP requests. In a sense, Actor behaves like a real-time web server or standard API server.

#### How do I know if Standby mode is enabled?
You will know that the Actor is enabled for the Standby if you see the **Standby** tab on the Actor's detail page.
In the tab, you will most importantly find the hostname of the server. You will find the description of the endpoints for this Actor,
what parameters they accept and what they return, in the Actor README.

To use the Actor in the Standby mode, you do not need to do anything, no clicking start button, etc. Simply use the provided hostname and endpoint in your application,
hit the API endpoint, and consume results.

![Standby tab](./images/actor_standby/standby-tab.png)

#### Can I still run the Actor in normal mode?
Yes, you can still modify the input and click the Start button to run the Actor in normal mode. However, note that the Standby Actor might

> not support this mode; the run might fail or return empty results. The normal mode is always supported in the Standby Beta, even for Actors that do not handle

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
not support this mode; the run might fail or return empty results. The normal mode is always supported in Standby Beta, even for Actors that don't handle
```

it well. Please head to the Actor README to learn more about the capabilities of your chosen Actor.

#### Is there any scaling to accommodate the incoming requests?

> When you use the Actor in the Standby mode, the system automatically scales the Actor to accommodate the incoming requests. Under the hood,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When you use the Actor in Standby mode, the system automatically scales the Actor to accommodate the incoming requests. Under the hood,
```

- **Build** - The Actor build that the runs of the Standby Actor will use. Can be either a build tag (e.g. `latest.`), or a build number (e.g. `0.1.2`).

You can see these in the Standby tab of the Actor detail page. However, note that these properties are not configurable at the Actor level. If you wish to
use the Actor-level hostname, this will always use the default configuration. In order to override this configuration, just create a new Task from the Actor.
You can then head to the Standby tab of the created Task and modify the configuration as needed. Note that the task has a specific hostname, so make
sure to use that in your application if you wish to use the custom configuration.

#### Are the Standby runs billed differently?
No, the Standby runs are billed in the same fashion as the normal runs.

> However, there might be unexpected costs for running Actors in the Standby mode, as the Actors are running in the background and consuming resources even when no requests are being sent, until they are terminated after the idle timeout period.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, running Actors in Standby mode might have unexpected costs, as the Actors run in the background and consume resources even when no requests are being sent until they are terminated after the idle timeout period.
```

#### Are the Standby runs shared among users?
No, even if you use the Actor-level hostname with the default configuration, the background Actor runs for your requests are not shared with other users.

#### How can I enable standby for my Actor?
You can head to the Settings tab of your Actor, enable Standby mode, and set the default configuration.
![Standby for creators](./images/actor_standby/standby-creators.png)

Please make sure to properly describe your Actors, their endpoints, and the schema for their
inputs and ouputs in your README.

#### Can I monetize my Actor in the Standby mode?

> No, the Standby mode is currently in Beta and the monetization is not supported.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
No, Standby mode is currently in Beta, and monetization is not supported.
```

You can see these in the Standby tab of the Actor detail page. However, note that these properties are not configurable at the Actor level. If you wish to
use the Actor-level hostname, this will always use the default configuration. To override this configuration, just create a new Task from the Actor.
You can then head to the Standby tab of the created Task and modify the configuration as needed. Note that the task has a specific hostname, so make
sure to use that in your application if you wish to use the custom configuration.

#### Are the Standby runs billed differently

No, the Standby runs are billed in the same fashion as the normal runs.
However, running Actors in Standby mode might have unexpected costs, as the Actors run in the background and consume resources even when no requests are being sent until they are terminated after the idle timeout period.

#### Are the Standby runs shared among users

No, even if you use the Actor-level hostname with the default configuration, the background Actor runs for your requests are not shared with other users.

> #### How can I enable Standby for my Actor

Reviewer: This part is completely missing some development instructions. Let's add them once we have the `Actor.config.standbyPort` part in SDK ready.

Reviewer 3: I added example code

No, even if you use the Actor-level hostname with the default configuration, the background Actor runs for your requests are not shared with other users.

#### How can I develop Actors using Standby mode

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

You can head to the Settings tab of your Actor, enable Standby mode, and set the default configuration.
![Standby for creators](./images/actor_standby/standby-creators.png)

> For the coding part, you can use Apify SDK to retrieve the port Actor Standby should be listening on.

Reviewer 3: Done

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="JavaScript" label="JavaScript">

```js
import { Actor } from 'apify';

await Actor.init();
console.log(Actor.config.get('standbyPort'));
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Python" label="Python">

```python
from apify import Actor, Configuration

async def main() -> None:
    async with Actor:
        config = Configuration.get_global_configuration()
        print(config.standby_port)
```

</TabItem>

> </Tabs>

Reviewer: I would skip this and go straight for the example with the HTTP server, it's not too complicated, so there's no need to split it into two examples.

Reviewer 3: Done

See example below with a basic Actor using Standby mode.

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="JavaScript" label="JavaScript">

```js
import http from 'http';
import { Actor } from 'apify';

await Actor.init();

const server = http.createServer(async (req, res) => {
    res.writeHead(200, { 'Content-Type': 'text/plain' });
    res.end('Hello from Actor Standby!\n');
});

server.listen(Actor.config.get('standbyPort'));
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Python" label="Python">

```python
from http.server import HTTPServer, SimpleHTTPRequestHandler
from apify import Actor, Configuration

class GetHandler(SimpleHTTPRequestHandler):
    def do_GET(self):
        self.send_response(200)
        self.end_headers()
        self.wfile.write(b'Hello from Actor Standby!')

async def main() -> None:
    async with Actor:
        config = Configuration.get_global_configuration()

>         with HTTPServer(("", config.standby_port), GetHandler) as http_server:

Reviewer: Can't you just use `Actor.config.standby_port` here?

Reviewer 3: you're right, but it's not mentioned in docs https://docs.apify.com/sdk/python/reference/class/Configuration

Reviewer: It's there, just not very visible.
<img width="921" alt="Screenshot 2024-07-08 at 15 23 47" src="https://github.com/apify/apify-docs/assets/2934111/1fd94542-2de5-4165-ac04-dde61ab50531">

It's also mentioned in the `Actor` class docs: https://docs.apify.com/sdk/python/reference/class/Actor#config

But not in the code example in the Configuration & env vars section: https://docs.apify.com/sdk/python/docs/concepts/configuration

Reviewer: I've mentioned it in the issue here: https://github.com/apify/apify-sdk-python/issues/147
